Write about map rework
- Added tunnel
- Adjusted tutorial path
- Added more stone spawn areas

Thu night, March 26. Sitting and ideating. 11:20 pm
I was looking for interesting rhythmical patterns to implement for different levels of musical intensities, or activities.

Patterns on the cave wall that represent the rhythm generated by the music patch.


Still learning Unreal. Sometimes losing days to learn and then implement what I need. This slows me down.


I had trouble programming a rhythm that was otherwise easy to play for me when tapping my fingers on my desk. I wanted to visualize it and opened procreate to draw a pattern of points meant to represent the two rhythmic elements. The brush made me think of the painting on the wall. I wanted to have a cave drawing of the rhythm which the player could watch


Added MS Acoustics but after three days of rendering, the result was not good enough.
I can't afford such long iteration cycles. I will therefore look for another approach to have a believable reverberation and occlusion. Unreal supports impulse responses for its reverb. I can look for impulse responses of spaces with a similar geometry and surface structure, to approximate how the environment would affect and shape the sounds.

A momentary snapshot. 9:37 PM. Sunday.
Despite various attempts at relaxing, this project is difficult to let go.

I was disappointed that Acoustics didn't solve all audio immersion problems, or any at all, for that matter. I'm sure with more time and learning I could achieve better results. For now, however, let's go take a quick and dirty, non systemic approach: using snapshots of real-world reverbs (impulse responses) to achieve a sense of space by affecting the ways that sound travels - or rather appears to travel - on our simulated island.

But now I think, why am I striving for realism? There must be certain aspects of it that may enhance our experience. However, now I think the impact it creates as an experience is more pertinent. Through that, realism may still be approached but from a different angle.
For now, I've placed impulse responses for the main areas: swamp, beach, cave, hill. As soon as I'll find fitting impulse responses, I will add them to the remaining areas as well.

Debugging as an afterthought? But then again, there aren't that many bugs because I'm only working on one thing at a time...

The implementation of the parrots is not always great. I noticed that the calls sounded artificial when few.

I did another commit and merge because I accidently ended the commit title with a period, which had not been the case in any of the commits in this repo before. Pretty stupid to roll that back though, since it's still a previous commit. Maybe I just did that as a joke though? I have committed comedy. It's April 1 in my birth time zone, after all.



**Going diegetic**
I was thinking about Schafer's acoustic ecology