[Back to main](index.html)


This is the last journal entry that is taking place during the initial development phase of this project, which is part of my self-directed research. I will outline some of the last changes and additions of the previous weeks and then move on to conduct a little retrospective of what happened here in the past three months.







**Post mortem?**
I don't understand why these project retrospectives are referred to as post mortems. At least in my case, the project is far from dead - if anything it has become alive only now that all the relevant systems are in place:
- Adaptive procedural music system
- Custom attenuation settings for different sound sources
- Local reverb, with different settings per area
- Gameplay: Collecting stones
- Rewards: Events happening when the player collects certain amount of stones
- Day/night system
- Footstep system
- Audible actors with dynamic parameters


Unfortunately, I lost a few days trying to fix the project, which began with all the light settings being broken. Trying to fix the issue, I upgraded to the Unreal 5.4 preview version. However, since that didn't fix the problem and introduced several new ones, I had to downgrade back to 5.3. This was far from trivial, since Unreal projects are generally not meant to be downgraded - I couldn't open the map anymore after going back. Copying parts of previous commits into the current one helped getting everything running again but at the same time, it lead to an unknown error when trying to make a built. After a few days of experimenting, upgrading and downgrading again, everything was finally back to normal. I'm not sure what specifically fixed the issue but I'm sure glad it's over. I'm less glad, however, that this happened just when all parts of the project had come into place. I had hoped that at this point, it would be quick and easy to add various enhancements - a new ambient sound here, another reward for collecting stones there, maybe some more reverb etc.

In general, I was fighting technical issues far more often than anticipated. It began with various issues back when the project still ran in Unity (see [2024-02-14](2024-02-14.md)). Then, after switching to Unreal, I would often need to stop and learn a new skill that would allow me to do the things I wanted/needed to do. While I can safely say that I am now much more confident in using Unreal than I was three months ago, I'm also under the impression that these intermittent bouts of forced learning were in the way of developing more creative and experimental approaches for Soundgarden.

I moved away from the idea that I want to combine every natural sound with a musical one, because all of the music generators are now integrated into the game environment, with the exception of percussion, until I find a reasonable way to integrate it into the environment as well. This means that natural and musical sounds area always combined in the soundscape anyway. Only the ocean sound still combines noise and a saw wave into one.


For this project, I have not only been utilizing commit messages for the first time, I used them quite extensively, making them more like mini journal entries. I noticed how this facilitated a constant reaffirmation and rethinking of my design goals: Sometimes, I would realize how to implement a feature while formulating my intentions, other times I would begin to refine existing ideas while I was describing them.


Last minute additions
- Adjusted the rocks forming the hill outlook to look more like they were actually placed on top of each other. This is a hint at a [Cairn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cairn) mechanic I want to add in the future: Collecting rocks will let them fall on a pile and freeze their position on impact, which will gradually build a tower, or cairn (I didn't know how to call these rock piles until now).
- Added speakers: Found some assets on Quixel Bridge. A horn for [Sound_Kait](Sound_Kait.md) and a metal bell, which I use upside down, for [Sound_Gamelan](Sound_Gamelan.md).

**Things that I still want to do**
- Reverb: Due to some last minute tech issues I couldn't finish the reverb implementation. Everything is in ready to go though, since I have already placed all volumes, made component configs and found impulse response for the different areas. Just need to figure out how sub-mixes work in Unreal.
- More ecology: I would like to explore more generative relationships by adding more elements which react to global changes and influence each other, beyond just checking sun intensity. For example, adding more ways audible entities influence music in some way (like the [parrots](Sound_Parrots.md)), or make something else appear/disappear.
- Connecting the ocean and wind system: High wind intensity should lead to higher waves, low wind intensity to lower waves.
- More visual effects: For audible entities that are not visible, such as the [frogs](Sound_Frogs.md) in the swamp, I would like to give them more presence, not necessarily by animated models to the scene but instead adding particle and sound effects like splashing water, which could be triggered by the sound generator
- Audio performance optimization: Audio currently doesn't cause any performance issues, however many sources are set to play even if they're out of audible reach because they would not reactivate again otherwise. This could become a problem once I exceed the voice count of 128, since I'm not sure if raising the limit even further might eventually lead to underruns. I think the reactivation issue has to do with routing audio from one source to environmental buses. It seems to break the connection when restarting a source...?
- More weather: Some rain would be nice!