[Back to main](index.html)
###### Post mortem 💀
I still don't like this term to talk about a finished project. First of all, Soundgarden is not fully finished yet - and even if it was, the result is not something dead but rather something that is very much alive. The way I see it, developing a project does seem to present some parallels to birthing: It may take a long time, it may be painful, but the result is (hopefully) something new, alive, breathing. So I would prefer an alternative term that incorporates that idea. Post natalis would be the closest to my idea. However, post partum sounds more in the vein of post mortem and is actually a commonly used term in the context of birth, even if it may carry a slightly more negative connotation: Postpartum depression, the type of depression that happens after having a baby. But then again, the feeling of emptiness, of falling into a hole when finishing a project or meeting an anticipated deadline may not actually be unfamiliar to some. Also, deadline... another one of these death-themed terms... For now, let's not get caught up in semiotics too much, but perhaps the "undeadening" of design and project management terminology might be something to think about in more depth in the future.
###### Post partum 👶
As already mentioned, Soundgarden is not fully finished yet, however, it has reached a state where all the essential elements are there and working. Moving on, I would like to leave the project at its current state open to be studied, examined, dissected, with all development resources up to this point being available for anyone to access. I also plan to develop this into a more polished version, where I will further explore and develop some ideas that are already implied in the existing project, finish the remaining empty areas on the sound-led island and lagoon, and perhaps fill in the gaps in between everything else, in addition to technical improvements and overall polish as well as a (cheap) commercial release on online platforms such as Steam. Perhaps "professionalization" would be the appropriate term here? Looks like the baby will be growing up over the next foreseeable period of time.
But between the last journal entry (back in February!) and the baby's first steps that will follow, let's shed a light on what has actually happened - a small, or maybe not so small interlude.
###### The interlude 🎶
A lot has happened in a relatively short time, triggered by the fact that I had been busy on another project but then Soundgarden was about to be presented at Ludodrome, an experimental video games exhibition that took place on May 15. Many additions emerged in the three weeks leading up to it. In that time, there were only two (large) commits, even though the changes, big and small, were countless - I was certainly playing a risky game here. The accompanying commit messages are marked by merely being lists of "new stuff". I wouldn't say that this period was completely devoid of reflection - but let's say, reflection happened more between the lines here...
So while perhaps this period of rapid additions and improvements may not have been the most reflection-driven, I realized that sometimes being in the flow of development can be liberating - if used in moderation. Looking back, it seems that this felt like opening a valve, releasing all the ideas that had accumulated in the back of my head (and the project board) over time, while I was busy working on other things. So maybe this was not a period where reflection was absent, but rather that the reflection had happened ahead of this phase - via past rumination and ideation, as can be (partially) witnessed in the previous journal entries and commit messages. Perhaps sometimes it can be healthy to not interrupt "the process" once in a while - spontaneity may also facilitate experimentation in the moment and a closeness to one's inner world, that - while more raw at times - may facilitate a big leap forward.
Still, I wonder if the fact that I re-introduced an agile-style board with high-level task titles had also something to do with the fact that I was journaling less and writing more simple commit messages. The tasks provided a thread to stick to, even though I feel like in the rush for preparing Soundgarden for the exhibition, I might also have just been working from what had already been floating in my head. Most likely, it's a bit of everything.
But let's move from the vague into the concrete and look at the content I had not described previously as well as what I have added more recently.
###### Added brushing 🪥
To further build on the idea of embodiment, I have added a system that simulates the player's body brushing against surfaces. It does so by fading in a noise. When the player passes closely along walls or other object on their side, the noise gets louder based on the players movement speed. To gain inspiration for the system's functionality, I brushed my shoulders and hands along vertical surfaces in real life. For lack of fitting audio samples and the means (or rather time) to record them, I just used synthesized white noise, with some frequencies filtered out, that is then played back from audio sources to the left and right of the player character. I'm actually surprised how well this simple approach is close to real-life brushing things. I had also hoped that this might make it easier to navigate the dark tunnel, since players would be able to "hear" walls being on the left or right of them, however, the existing wind sounds do seem to mask this. I should still consider simplifying the dark tunnel gameplay, but this is a topic for the future. Further, I can imagine enhancing the brushing mechanic by adding light controller vibration, although this would only be most effective if we had means to differentiate between vibration coming from the left or right. And this feature is not available in all types of gamepads. Still, I should check what's possible here. The PS5 DualSense controller might be able to do something like that. Note to self: Get one of those.

###### Lagoon 🌊
In lieu of adding a third island, as mentioned in the past, I had decided to make a lagoon that would connect the two existing islands, filling the oceanic gap in between them - and removing the teleport that was meant as a tentative solution anyway. After gathering some inspiration by looking at pictures and videos of real-life lagoons, I sculpted wavy lines of sand that connected the two islands. I then traced these lines with my usual massive copying and pasting, rotating, and scaling of one and the same 3d model of rock, to give it more structure and improve the visual look. Very happy how this turned out! I also like the idea of the lagoon because it provides a good excuse of featuring various ocean sounds more prominently, so that the player can hear all this beautiful splishing and splashing all around!
(INCLUDE LAGOON PICTURE HERE)
###### Night sky 💫
I have reworked the day-night cycle to be free of the previously stuttering sun -something I'm not sure I have mentioned before, but yes, the sun was stuttering - and I have also added a starry and colorful night sky, along with a moon. Beyond its aesthetic value, the reason for adding an illuminated night sky and moonlight was to create a reasonable origin for an additional light source during the otherwise pitch black night, which in turn allowed to diegetically avoid complete darkness that made it otherwise difficult to navigate the environment of Soundgarden at night, without having to add countless light sources all over the environment.
###### Reworked interaction system 👆
While on the surface it may not seem much different from before, I've reimplemented the interaction system that allows the player to pick up rocks and press the buttons in the Odd One Out gameplay area. I have actually transferred this new and more versatile system (one unified system for all interactions) from another project I had been working on at the time - and now I'm happy to have something I can consistently and reliably use across all my projects. Something that also seems bug-free, compared to what I had implemented before. This is also demonstrative of my increased (and still increasing) proficiency with Unreal Engine.
###### Sea Organ 🐚
Inspired by the sea organ in Zadar, Croatia, I've created an object that resembles more clearly a sort of virtual installation, placed in the lagoon area. This object, at least at the time of writing might pose one of the visually more distinctive objects in Soundgarden's environment, clearly removed from its otherwise natural look. A white, almost concrete-looking object that emanates layers of sine waves that provide an auditive interplay with the surrounding ocean. To keep with the "influencing sound" focus of the lagoon, the player can press one of a set of buttons to change the tonality of the emerging sines, ranging from more harmonic to atonal outcomes. Come to think of it, I wonder if I should also introduce at least one microtonal mode here...
###### Musical marbles ⚽
Somehow, I had been imagining this idea of large glowing marbles for a long time. Perhaps I just like the glassy look, and the idea of how it would refract the light passing through it. Come to think of it, I think the reason I went with marbles is the idea of playfulness they suggest. Marbles are meant to be rolled around, pushed, clashed against each other. So their look would invite players to do exactly that. So I've added these marbles that the player can interact with by bumping against them, rolling them around. They are placed in the middle of the lagoon, in a pitch, shielded from the sounds of the surrounding water to allow them to be fully heard.
###### Fading walls ✨
In the vein of improving the introduction phase in the beginning of Soundgarden and making it look (even) more visually appealing, I've developed a shader that fades away the rock barriers in a flash of light, resulting in an (at least for me) impressive visual play. This also helps to more effectively direct the player's attention towards where they have to move in the tutorial phase of the game. I have also reused this fading effect in the area featuring the Odd One Out listening puzzle. What I find personally interesting is that I've developed this effect with the Ludodrome exhibition in mind, thinking that a nice effect like that may draw the attention of exhibition visitors to the game. This made me think about how different presentation contexts for a project can inform decisions that have an impact on the overall experience.
(INSERT SHORT VIDEO OF FADING WALLS HERE)
###### Learnings 🤓
So, what have I learned in the 1+ year of (on and off) working on Soundgarden?
First off, Soundgarden was what finally pushed me over to learn Unreal, or rather, to use it productively and learn working with its various aspects over time. I now know various ways of implementing (real-time) audio with the engine: I've deepened my understanding of MetaSounds by transferring my knowledge of modular audio systems and and electroacoustic approaches, learning how to implement real-time generative music and dynamic sound for all aspects of the game. I've implemented both sound in more traditional ways by placing static sound sources around the game environment and developed, as well as implemented my own approaches for dynamic sound sources that would react to changes in the environment, such as time of day, or world geometry and the player's relation to it (e.g., the sound of the ocean moving around the islands, to be positioned closest to the player). I still need to learn how to apply audio effects like reverberation, and to make it dynamic and/or adapt to its immediate environment, to match its sonic features with the world geometry at any given point - something for the Steam version. I also would like to implement support for more immersive sound setups, including surround sound and Dolby Atmos - it would be nice to hear the parrots' cries actually coming from above you! I have learned how to implement all necessary game logic using UE's blueprint system, and how to develop my own modules in C++, to enhance engine functionality, or just use it when its more convenient that a visual programming approach. I've also managed to improve the project's performance over time so that it runs smoother on current and runs at all on older and weaker hardware, while looking more beautiful than ever. I've also learned to use UE's procedural content generation system to build my own tools for level design and creating more stylized environments. While I haven't done the latter in Soundgarden (and I wish I have, had I known how at the time!), this will certainly impact how my future projects will look. Overall, this year of working on Unreal has made my transition from Unity complete, so for the time being, UE will be my technology of choice in developing any new games and virtual environments onward.
###### Et cetera 🔣
Things I would still like to do and haven't mentioned yet:
- VR support: It would be nice to actually stand on the islands and experience the lagoon from a true first person perspective. I'm also sure this would make for an even more encompassing sound impression and would be more interesting from an embodiment perspective.
- More sophisticated music: I would like to use the insights I have gathered from my electroacoustic explorations over the past months, as well as from the many virtual modular generative sound systems I've built to improve the generative music in Soundgarden that is featured on the ecological island, including dynamic changes of tonality, more variations in timbre, and percussive sounds that integrate better with the overall soundscape and music.
- I still need to finish the northern part of the sound-led island. For the sake of the exhibition, I have currently closed it off but I would still like to add another sound-led mechanic here. In fall of last year, I had prototyped rhythm mechanic, where the player would move across floating platforms to one or multiple (synchronized) rhythms, however, I had not implemented that yet because I was looking for a way to do say that integrated well with the given visual aesthetic of Soundgarden - and because I'm not sure if I'd want to implement gameplay that has been sufficiently explored across many existing rhythm games. Perhaps, I will need to think of something new here, inspired by one of the many sound exercises described by R. Murray Schafer.
- I would also like to add a third sound interaction in the lagoon area. I still need to think about something concrete here. In addition to Schafer's sound exercises, I may want to take a look at various ethnomusicological studies and getting inspiration from musicking practices around the world.

This has become by far the longest journal post for Soundgarden, though perhaps this makes sense, given the final nature of this writing. I will sure have to find a new format for my ruminations on the work I do. Journaling has been extremely helpful to reflect and improve upon my ideas. The development that I do these days has gained in depth, and - I dare to cautiously say - has improved the quality of the work I do, and certainly enhanced my learnings and their retention. I feel like I've become a better game developer, perhaps even a better scholar, and I'm excited to see where my future ruminations will lead me.
At this point, I would also like to extend my sincere gratitude to the Materializing Design (INSERT LINK HERE) project, without which Soundgarden might not have shaped the trajectory of my research in the profound ways it has and I am happy to continue on that path.


Brushing
- Getting back into old habits: Back to using an agile board again since the number of tasks got to a level that requires an overview.
- Using insights from machine learning player modeling project for musical player guidance
- Looking at hardware (Arp 2600, Moog Labyrinth) for new music improvements
- Git board cards as micro journals