[Back to main](index.html)
###### The magic circle 🛞
I was showing Soundgarden to a friend - someone who does play some games from time to time, but who isn't necessarily someone who would identify himself as a gamer. I observed him playing the game and exploring the environment.
One moment that was particularly noteworthy was him turning the player view in quick, erratic movements, jerking the mouse across the desk in various motions. This led to not only the view moving so fast it would turn into a blur - it also affected the surrounding sounds, quickly displacing them in the stereo spectrum and affecting their audible frequencies in interesting ways. This made me think about a new interaction for the lagoon area - one that is rooted in the player's movement.
I was thinking about a designated spot - the magic circle - that the player can occupy. Once they enter the circle, certain sound objects in the area will react to the player moving the first person camera, i.e., when the player looks around. The velocity and direction of the camera movement could affect the output coming from these sound objects. The idea behind this is to direct the player's attention to the fact that moving their gaze, especially quickly, will affect how sounds around them can be perceived, and how they sound like. Ideally, the player would then not only play around with the interactive sound objects around this magic circle but also be inspired to experiment with such movements anywhere within the Soundgarden archipelago.
###### A brand new title ✨
In light of Soundgarden's Steam release, I had to think more seriously about branding and legal implications. While Soundgarden does share its name with the eponymous grunge band, it shouldn't be an issue since one is a band and the other a video game. But I don't want to get into trouble with some potentially overzealous trademark lawyers. Therefore a new name had to found for this project. After some rumination, marketing think, and several Google searches, I eventually ended up with: Beyond Sound: Soniferous Isles