**Things that held me back**
- Learning Unreal: I didn't always know how to implement an idea, requiring time to learn a certain technique, and being slow implementing something for the first time.
- Technical infrastructure: Long render times for MS Acoustic. With short iteration, I may have kept it in the project.

**Situating the island sounds**

I created sound objects that would be symbols for certain areas on the map.
Schafer differentiates between Keynotes, Signals, and Soundmarks. Keynotes are those sounds that are not necessarily listened to consciously but are inherent to an environment or setting, providing a background sound against which other sounds are perceived. They are often likened to a musical keynote, which provides the tonal foundation of a musical piece but might not be immediately noticeable. In a natural environment, keynotes could be the sound of wind in the trees or water in a stream; in an urban environment, it might be the hum of traffic or air conditioning systems. These sounds define the character of the place and are often heard by those living within the environment as the sound of home or normality.

Keynotes
- Waves clashing in the background, washing over the shore
- World tone: Typically

Signals
- Birds flying by ???

Soundmarks
- Cove: Musical frogs
- Hill: Musical wind
- Beach: Musical waves

Soundmarks are the unique sounds that define a location. Since the island environment is not based on a real place, one might argue that there cannot be any soundmarks here.
However, what defines this island are its musical sounds, which are unique to this virtual locus. I will therefore interpret these as soundmarks.


- Keep in mind new environmental sounds need custom attenuation curves



Working with game engines involves an inversion of the process that yields data from observations. Here, by setting the data either directly (e.g., drawing an animation curve that changes values over time), or modifying procedural actors, which leads to an emergence of data (e.g., imagine having procedurally generated flocks of birds that are programmed to be active at certain times of day) has a significant influence on the resulting data.


There is also a simple implementation of music intensity that goes up the further the player is away from the next stone. Should play around with distances more here. Currently, intensity (0...1) is connected to some rhythmic elements, leading to more intense percussion patterns (=more hits) with values towards intensity = 1 when the player is far away from the goal, and no percussion at all (intensity = 0) when the player is close to the goal. The idea is to animate the player to move around and look for the stone using more animated percussive patterns.

They also help us in understanding relations



I reduced the island size. While the feeling of wandering can be a mode of experience, it felt too tiresome to walk all the way around the island looking for a collectible. 



I think what all of these songs have in common is that they feature short, repetitive musical structures. These structures lend themselves well for algorithmic recreation. Combining a series of modular music generators, each in itself a rather simple design, leads to a  Due to their concise nature and combination of a minimal amount of rhythmical and melodic elements, with a nevertheless complex and, perhaps even pleasant nature that 

**Filling in the gaps**

I first wanted to have the music change according to the sun intensity, to essentially have different musical settings based on whether it's day or nighttime. However, after moving all the music to the diegetic environment space, things fell into place: Since sun intensity already dictates the audible activities of certain elements, that already lead to varying music at different times of day - another example of systemic thinking's beneficial impacts on game design!



04-04-2024 8:00 PM
I found something. The intuition. And with it, an acceptance of where this journey is going.



I remade the frog sounds in the swamp, since the pitch of their calls was not clear enough to connect with the music. I took a different kind of frog sound as inspiration:

Then, I recreated it. Because I could achieve a result that resembled the inspiration closely just by  using synthesized sounds, no samples were used here: